{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red28\green28\blue28;\red28\green28\blue28;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red10\green0\blue109;\red255\green39\blue18;\red217\green11\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8460\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \\documentclass\{article\}\
\\begin\{document\}\
\\usepackage(amsmath\}\
Einstein\'92s theory of gravity relates the curvature of spacetime to the stress energy tensor.\
\
[einstein\'92s eqations]\
\
The theory has withstood several observational tests. Among them are Gravity Probe B\'92s measurement of gravitomagnitism, and Eddington\'92s measurement of the deflection of light but he sun. Additionally, GR is able to explain the advancement of the perihelion in Mercury\'92s orbit, and recovers Newtonian gravity in the appropriate limits. However, these tests occurred at length and mass scales no larger than those found in the solar system. On larger scales (galactic, cluster, and cosmological) there is tension between the Einstein equations as described above, and astronomical and cosmological measurements. Measurements in these mass and size regimes do not agree with Einstein\'92s theory, as understood above. For example, rotation curves of spiral galaxies indicate their stars and gas have circular velocities that are too large to be explained by luminous matter alone. \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
While we do not claim rotation curves to be the only source of tension between theory and observation, this particular example provides a good framework for the topic of this paper\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
[figure about a rotation curve. look at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://arxiv.org/pdf/astro-ph/9909252v1.pdf"}}{\fldrslt https://arxiv.org/pdf/astro-ph/9909252v1.pdf}} for a rotation curve of M33. 
\fs26 \cf3 \cb4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 "The extended rotation curve and the dark matter halo of M33". {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monthly_Notices_of_the_Royal_Astronomical_Society"}}{\fldrslt 
\i \cf5 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society}}. 
\b \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 311
\b0 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0  (2): 441\'96447. Look at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu//full/1991MNRAS.249..523B/0000527.000.html"}}{\fldrslt http://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu//full/1991MNRAS.249..523B/0000527.000.html}} for a whole lot of them]\
\

\fs24 The rotation curves presented in the literature cannot be explained by Einstein\'92s gravity and baryonic matter (stars, dust, gas and so on) alone. The best fit lines through the data, and the velocity profiles for the luminous matter disagree considerably. Most notable is the \'91flattening\'92 feature of the data at large radii, which is inconsistent with the gas and luminous curves, which tapper off. Clearly, something is amiss. \
\
One way to resolve the tension is to add non-baryonic forms of matter-energy to the Stress Energy Tensor. By adding a \'91dark matter halo\'92 to the density profile of spiral galaxies, we may recover the observed rotation curves. Another strategy is to alter the theory of gravity all together. The rotation curves may be recovered if we include correction terms to Newtonian gravity. One may view these perspectives as altering the right hand side of equation [1] for the former, and altering the left hand side of equation [1] for the latter. \
\
The previous example presents a boiler plate of how the remainder of the paper will follow. We will examine the abilities of dark matter/dark energy models and modified gravity models to explain observation, across different length and mass scales. To do this rigorously, we must first clearly define dark matter and dark energy, and discuss some theories of modified gravity.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc
\cf3 Lambda CDM\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural
\cf3 \
Although there are several dark matter/dark energy models to choose from, one of the most tested and widely successful comes from $\\lambda$CDM cosmology, sometimes referred to as \'92standard cosmology. This paradigm can be understood by starting with the Friedmann equations and Friedmann Walkerson metric.\
\
fw metric, fw equation\
\
in $\\lambda$CDM, we take k from equation $$ to be zero, corresponding to a flat universe. From the Friedmann equation, we can see this leads to a restriction on the Stress Energy Tensor, $\\rho_c$ = $frac\{3H^2\}\{8piG\}$. We then describe $\\rho_c$ as being made up of different species,\
\
\cf6 cite caroll\cf3 \
\
$\\Omega_\{i\} = frac\{\\rho_\{i\}\}\{\\rho_\{c\}\}$\
\
where \
\
$\\Omega = \\Sigma \\Omega_\{i\}\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural
\cf2 \cb1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 cite: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0404175"}}{\fldrslt \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0404175}}\cf3 \cb4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural
\cf3 \
Where the different species are \\Omega_\{M\}, \\Omega_\{R\}, \\Omega_\{\\Lambda\}. Omega_\{R\}, from radiation, is at a scale of ~10^\{-4\}, and thus the mass-energy budget is dominated by \cf2 \cb1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \\Omega_\{M\} and \\Omega_\{\\Lambda\}.\cf3 \cb4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 \
\
\cf6 cite caroll\cf3 \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural
\cf2 \cb1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \\Omega_\{M\} has been measured by experiments like WMAP, SDSS, and PLANK. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0310723"}}{\fldrslt https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0310723}}. The Plank measurement has the smallest error bars, and is consistent with the aforementioned experiments, and gives \\Omega_\{M\} = .308 +\\- 0.012 {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01589"}}{\fldrslt https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.01589}}, which implies \\Omega_\{\\Lambda\} to be approximately .7\
\
\\Omega_\{M\} can be further subdivided into two categories, baryonic matter (the usual matter we encounter day to day, made up of protons and neutrons) and non-baryonic matter. Measurements of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background , measurements of quasar spectra, and measurements of luminous mass in galaxy clusters puts \\Omega_\{b\} to be within 2%-5% of \\rho_\{c\}. This means the remaining matter in the universe is nonbaryonic. \cf7 [cite modern cosmology by scott]\
\cf0 \
Observational tests and numerical simulations have had some success in describing nonbaryonic matter, or dark matter, as it is sometimes called. A detailed description of dark matter goes hand in hand with the experimental results which describe it. As a result, we will differ a detailed description of dark matter until we address these experiments, their results, and implications for the \\Lambda CDM paradigm later in the paper. However, for the time being it is worth briefly characterizing it. Dark matter is dynamically cold (hence the C in \\Lambda CDM), in that it moves at speeds << c. This means it will remain in close proximity to baryonic matter on galactic scales an higher, as it is unable to escape the gravitational potential of baryonic matter. It cannnot interact with light, (hence dark), or if can, it does so very weakly. Furthermore, it is dissipative less, it is unable to radiate light. And finally, It is collisionless.\cf6 [cite this shit stacy\'92s review paper]\cf0 \
\
Likewise, there have been successes in describing observations of the universe by invoking dark energy. While we will wait until further discussions of experiments for a detailed characterization of dark energy, for the time being we may briefly discuss it. We may take \\Omega_\{\\Lambda\} to be the dark energy component of universe\'92s mass-energy budget. This corresponds to an energy which pervades the universe and is responsible for the expansion of the universe. \cf6 [cite mode cosmology scott]\cf0 \
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\qc
\cf0 Modified Theories of Gravity\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural
\cf3 \cb4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 \
The earliest attempt to explain gravitational dynamics by changing Newton\'92s laws of motion instead of allowing the stress energy tensor to have dark mater/energy components was offered by Milgrom in 1983 [{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983ApJ...270..365"}}{\fldrslt http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1983ApJ...270..365}}]. At large distances from galactic centers (at the kilo parsec scale), the accelerations of stars are on the order of ~10^\{-10\}ms^\{-2\}. He added an ad hoc interpolating function that would connect the familiar acceleration regimes of newtonian gravity to these low order regimes via a smooth transition. \
\
\\mu(\\frac\{g\}\{a_\{0\}\}) \\bold\{g\} = \\bold\{g_\{N\}\}\
\
where a_\{0\} is a constant with units of acceleration, \\mu is the interpolating function, g is the local accretion due to gravity, and \\g_\{N\} is the newtonian acceleration. In order to stitch the two acceleration regimes in galaxies together, we require \\mu tends to 1 as g >> a_\{0\}, and \\mu tends to \\frac\{g\}\{a_\{0\}\} for \cf2 \cb1 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \\frac\{g\}\{a_\{0\}\} << 1. \cf6 [cite stacy\'92s paper]. \cf0 By choosing \\mu(x) = x(1+x^\{2\})^\{-2\} and a_\{0\} 2 x 10^\{-8\} cms^\{-2\} the rotation curves of galaxies are recovered, with no need to add dark matter or any unseen matter.\
\
\cf3 \cb4 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 \\end\{\
document\}\
}